this is the only middle split video that
you will ever need to watch bear with me
it sounds complicated at first cuz not
only is there specific muscles that you
need to train but you also need to work
with your own bone structure to find a
way to make the middle splits actually
work for your body believe it or not I
actually have terrible middle split
genetics with my bone structure but I
can make it work so can you so the first
and most obvious step you need some
flexible muscles the main ones being
your hamstrings and of course your
adductors which most people just call
their inner thighs so here's a quick
test can you put your palms fully flat
on the ground and next in a butterfly
stretch can you touch your forehead all
the way to your toes but the ultimate
test which combines both the hamstrings
and the adductor flexibility into one
beautiful stretch the pancake stretch
you'll know you've made it when you can
touch your chest or even your stomach
all the way down to the ground so right
there is a very simple list of stretches
hamstring stretch butterfly stretch and
pancake stretch and as you can see there
are easy variations exhale sink deeper
and you're going to hold and there are
heart variations and then you're going
to reach your elbow all the way down and
this goes for every single exercise easy
hard easy hard but the most important
stretch is practicing the middle splits
at whatever level you are at right now
you're never going to get get better at
the actual skill unless you practice it
but first you need to know the technique
that's going to get you there but before
that a sponsor surprise it's me the
sponsor but seriously though I have a
full middle split program at the top of
the description go ahead and click it
check it out stay flexy guys back to the
video right come on all right all right
back to technique this bone right here
is called your femur it's shaped a
little bit like this and it fits into
your hip socket and it moves around kind
of like this but when you just try and
go to your middle split with no
technique ow something happens the top
part of your femur smashes into your
pelvis and as you can see the leg
doesn't go out a full 180° it stops
before you can get to the middle split
position not fun so this is where your
genetics come in some people have
different hip angles and if you have a
higher hip angle it doesn't really
matter if you just go out straight to
the side like that but that is
definitely not me and I'm assuming it's
not you because only a small percentage
of the population actually has that
seriously I have bad middle split
genetics this is about as far as I can
go and my head isn't even in frame but
luckily there is a solution and it's
called external rotation what the heck
is that let's say you have a terrible
femoral angle kind of like me and it
looks a little bit like this so instead
of just going ow ow ow out to the side
what you do is you externally rotate as
you go to the side and you're able to go
180° to the to the side so you rotate
outwards As you move to the leg to the
side instead of going out you rotate and
you go out see but remember the
beginning of the video I kept one muscle
group secret and it's the one that
usually hinders external rotation your
ability to externally rotate your hips
is dictated by your glutes because I
know somebody is going to correct me yes
I know it's the external rotators and
not the glutes and I know they're not
the same thing but for Simplicity sake
please we're just going to say glutes
I'm sorry I'm sorry but for real though
uh most glute stretches also stretch the
external rotators so that's why that's
why it's like that back to the video so
we need to add another stretch to the
mix and that stretch is the pigeon pose
and you bet there's an easy version
opposite side glute just like that and a
hard version you're going to lean the
chest so just pick the variation that
works best for you so instead of just
stopping where it hurts HS you can
externally rotate which looks like this
which gives me access to more range of
motion and if you're really picky about
keeping your feet on the ground because
it's a straddle not a middle split Spot
the Difference straddle middle split
stradle middle split the only difference
between those two stretches is the ankle
flexibility to put your foot on the
ground which I'll make a video about
soon but for most people who aren't
martial artists just focus on the hips
so now that you have the proper
technique that's great but it doesn't
automatically mean you're flexible you
still need to stretch but exactly how
much there are two papers that I would
look at there's this one which looked at
all the available literature at the time
and found out that about 5 minutes a
week is the minimum to make flexibility
progress so all I got to do is hold a
stretch for 5 minutes a week and then
I'm done uh not quite cuz in this second
paper they found Di finishing Returns
the longer you held the stretch they
tested 15 seconds 30 seconds and 60
seconds and what do you know 30 seconds
outperformed all of them so what that
really means is you need to get 30
second sets enough times that the total
volume adds up to 5 minutes don't worry
you don't have to do math for 30 seconds
that's 10 sets every single week that
means that if you hold a 30second
stretch and then you rest and then you
hold that 30-second stretch again that's
one minute toward your 5 minute total
and if you do that Monday Tuesday
Wednesday Thursday and Friday and you
rest on Saturdays and Sundays that's 5
minutes a week and you just have to do
that for every single stretch or
theoretically you could do five sets of
30second stretches every Monday and
Wednesday for every single stretch but
that's a little much for me but whatever
floats your boat I've made progress
doing both so if we were to build a
routine out of everything we learned it
would look a little something like this
hamstring stretch 30 seconds butterfly
stretch 30 seconds then your pancake
stretch again 30 seconds pigeon stretch
30 seconds and then lastly you need to
practice your middle split at whatever
level you're at now technically if you
did this you would only need to do a 4
days a week and it would count as 6
minutes toward each muscle Group which
is more than the 5 minute requirement
what
how well there's only three muscle
groups we really care about and the
hamstring stretch stretches one of them
so that's 30 seconds out of the way but
it gets interesting when you get to the
butterfly stretch because this one
stretches your adductors and your glutes
so for one stretch you get 30 seconds of
volume in both muscle groups so the
pancake stretch does the same thing but
for the hamstrings and adductors the
pigeon gets the glutes and the middle
split well that one does all three nice
so if you repeat that entire session
four days a week that's 3 6 9 12 sets of
30 seconds every week for every muscle
group 12 sets of 30 seconds in each
muscle group equals 6 minutes every
single week for every muscle group
needed to get the middle splits so all
your bases are covered and it's just a
matter of time before you get to your
middle splits now of course if you would
like more variation in your training and
different exercises every week I have a
full middle split program that I
mentioned earlier it's at the top of the
description I highly recommend checking
it out stay flexy guys
[Music]
me